So here's the brutal truth. About 80% of portfolio projects I see actually hurt your chances of getting hired. And it's not because you're bad at SQL or Tableau. It's actually just because these projects make you look more like a student than a data analyst. Over the past few years, I have seen hundreds of portfolio projects and I've mentored countless students to getting their first jobs in data at companies like Uber, Grubhub and Pandora. And I've seen exactly what separates good from great. Now there are usually five fatal mistakes that I see most portfolios commit. So today I'm going to share what those fatal mistakes are. And then I'm going to give you brutally honest feedback on your portfolio projects and grade these portfolio projects on three main aspects that hiring managers are looking for business relevance, analytical rigor, and professional polish. So by the end of this video, you'll know exactly where you stand. If you're new here, I'm Christine. I'm a former data director and a hiring manager who now helps people take the the most direct path to working a job in data. And on this channel, I share the strategies, frameworks, and the mindset tips to help you stand out. Let's dive in. So I'm going to order these mistakes from least to most fatal, so you know which ones are the most important ones to prioritize. Now, the first one is creating a fancy portfolio website. Don't get me wrong, nice aesthetics and design is great, but hiring managers are never coming to your portfolio and thinking, whoa, this color palette is so beautiful. We should hire them to analyze our data. They more so want to see what kinds of insights you can bring to their team on day one. Now, many people will spend weeks building a beautiful portfolio website, figuring out the animations, the color scheme, and the fonts, when it actually would be much more effective to use that time to find some real world opportunities through volunteering or practicing and learning something like data storytelling. So instead of building a fancy website, just use good old GitHub to host your projects and make sure to link directly to your best projects readme in your resume, your cover letter, and your LinkedIn profile so that your best work is just one click away. Hire managers don't want to scroll through five different tabs of about me and see all the certifications you've done. We want to be brought to your analytical skill set right away. Now the second mistake is overcompensating by focusing more on quantity than quality. I have seen portfolios with five, six, even seven projects that are all half-baked or overly technical or just don't make you look like an actual data analyst. Having more projects does not make you look more impressive. It just makes you look unfocused. So instead, you want to make sure that you go deep on one or two analytics-focused projects. So this means that they should be centered around business metrics and representative data. They should be focused on executive questions and showcase your ability to use analytical frameworks as well as data best practices. And 90% of your write-up should be about your insights and your impact. Now I call this the Ready Framework, which I talk about more in my portfolio playbook series. So check that out afterwards. One of my students, Danielle, had done a fancy Kaggle project that had gone nowhere. And when she reframed this project around marketing metrics and ROI, she was able to build a portfolio that looked much more impressive. And she ended up landing a job as a data analyst at JAL just a few weeks later. So just remember that if your portfolio looks like homework, it's going to be graded like homework. Now, a lot of people actually tank their portfolios by mixing roles. They have one project on machine learning, another project on a data pipeline, and then another one on a Tableau dashboard. And all this says to a hiring manager is, I'm not really sure what I want to be. So before you start on a new project, make sure to be intentional about the kinds of roles that you're applying to. And remember that data scientists build models, data engineers build pipelines, data analysts extract insights. So your project titles should actually sound like analysts work. For example, Spotify retention analysis or e-commerce sales trends or marketing ROI and budget analysis. You should stay away from titles like machine learning in Python or ETL data pipeline for sales data or statistical analysis and prediction model for churn. Those scream data science or data engineering. So make sure to reference real business metrics, industry names, company names in the titles of your projects so that it's very clear that you're focused on data analyst roles. The number four is brutal and it's one of the most common and fatal mistakes I see. About 70% of projects I see end with code as the final deliverable. Now picture this, let's say you work with a sales manager at work and they've asked you to do some analysis on last month's sales performance and you come to the next meeting with a 100 line SQL query. Now that's not analysis and they're going to wonder what the heck they should actually do with this query. Now you should be gearing your portfolio projects to a non-technical stakeholder because this shows the real work and insights you will be delivering at work. So this means that your project should focus on three main things, insights, recommendations, and visualizations that help with storytelling. So your GitHub repo can still show your code, your data, and your technical documentation, but you should separate this just into the files in the repository and leave the readme to be the front page that shows the story of your findings. This means that you players. There's the files that house all the technical stuff. And then there's a write-up that shows the work that you would actually be delivering on the job as an analyst. This means that if someone wants to dive into your technical work, they can, but they immediately see the kind of value that you bring as an analyst first. And finally, the worst mistake of all, the passion project that nobody asked for. These are projects that are grounded in personal interests rather than the actual data and metrics that you would see at an actual company. So if you're doing analysis on Dungeons and Dragon data, or you downloaded your Spotify wrapped and are analyzing the trends in your own songs over the last few years, then that's not showing me that you know how to do analysis. It's just showing me that you have a hobby. So you can definitely use public data sets, but just make sure that your projects are framed around a company context. So instead of doing analysis like SQL queries on Dungeons and Dragons stats, it should be something like video game retailer sales analysis, or instead of writing SQL queries on the outcomes of the US Open, see if you can do analysis on marketing platform sales. So something that is related to your personal interest, but still is very easily applicable to a wide variety of different industries. Now that one shift from personal to professional framing is going to instantly change how recruiters perceive your portfolio. So just remember that your portfolio should sound like work that a company would actually have you do. By the way, if you want me to guide you through this process step by step and help you become a standout data analyst in four months or less, then check out my program below because spots have just opened for the next cohort. So now that we've gotten the biggest mistakes out of the way, let's actually look at what this looks like in practice. I just want to say thank you to everyone who submitted a portfolio. I had almost a hundred portfolio submissions. So I just tried to pick a representative sample of the ones that I thought everyone could learn the most from. So we're going to start from the portfolios that missed the mark, and then we're going to move to the ones that are decent. And then we'll talk about the ones that are standout and why. I'm going to judge each of these portfolios on three main aspects. So business relevance, does it look at metrics and data and insights that are relevant to companies? Analectal rigor, so how much analytical thinking and technical rigor is behind the project? And professional polish, does it look clean? Is it sleek? Is it something you would actually hand to a stakeholder? By the end, you'll know exactly where your portfolio stands and what you should fix next. Okay, so this first portfolio is by Shikha, and I'm just going to go through it from perspective of a hiring manager. So right away, this is what your GitHub looks like. And I can see that the titles of the repository already, they don't really look that professional. This should be cleaned up and named more like how you would title an actual project at work. So for example, remote work health impact analysis, don't say SQL project, don't say Tableau project. These are projects that you have done for stakeholders at a company. That's the kind of framing that you should take. So I'm going to look at one of these projects now and see how this comes across. So This project analyzes the impact of remote work on employee wellbeing using a fictional survey data set for the year 2025. So right away saying something like fictional data already poses your project as something that you did for like school. You should frame it more as a data analyst who's working at a sample company. So for example, in this project, we analyze remote work impact on employee wellbeing for blank name, the actual company, You just come up with a company name and you can say throughout your analysis that this is a sample company. Um, okay. So I have project highlights, data set used key metrics and analysis, SQL skills, demonstrated business outcome files included and tools used right away. This as a cover page is just not doing you any favors. It needs to be about a page and a half to two pages long of insights, findings, visualizations, and recommendations. So right away I would get rid of SQL skills demonstrated and i would also uh get rid of tools used those are things that we can very obviously see just from what's in the file list itself and so this needs to be built out way way way more so for key metrics and analysis for example um burnout scores by work arrangement and job roles mental health distribution by region and remote work setup work hours and work life balance across age groups and common physical health issues by industry the way that this is listed i just don't really know what what this analysis is actually about. There needs to be context about this project. So why were you looking at these metrics? What do these metrics mean? And who do they actually matter for? What stakeholders are interested? What kinds of business questions were you actually answering? Then the business outcome is actionable insights to recommend improvements for employee well-being, including mental health support programs, flexible work policies, and targeted interventions. Now, as an outcome, this would actually be a very impressive and very relevant outcome. The thing is, the outcome itself is nowhere on this page. And as a hiring manager, I'm not going to really spend that much time poking through your different files to find what I need. I do see that there is a presentation in a PDF. So I'm going to go there and see what this looks like. SQL project, remote work health impact analysis. So again, just take out terminology having to do with technical tools so that people don't see it just as a technical project. Now we have a project overview. Um, and then the output itself of the analysis is just SQL queries. So again, this is going to be against you because it shows that your work as an analyst is mostly just focused around select star statements, which these days AI can write very easily. So in any kind of presentation, for example, you should be focusing a lot more on visualizations and findings, and you should screenshot the presentations and actually put your best slides in the readme. Don't leave that there for someone else to discover. Then if I poke into, let's say another project, so HR analytics employee attrition analysis tableau project super super long name but i do like that i can already see that shika's experience and domain knowledge is centered around hr analytics people operations people analysis so that's super relevant to an hr or operations team so one thing for you shika is to actually frame most of your projects around this domain if this is something where you have experience because this will stand out in the job hunt if you're applying to hr operations or people operations teams and then hr analytics so this project explores the key factors driving employee attrition using hr analytics data the project highlights are focused analysis and building a tableau dashboard key metrics and analysis tableau skills demonstrated and business outcome and again this is just really lacking in what did you actually find i need to see about a page and a half of your high level insights that you would deliver to an exec stakeholder and then some deep dive insights about the different dimensions you explored the things that you discovered about the hr data set and all of the findings that you have in this dashboard should actually be listed below or above so that i can see that as an analyst if you were to build this dashboard what insights would you actually get now the dashboard itself looks fine um to be honest there's a lot going on and i think that actually has more to do with the coloring than the actual structure i think the dashboard itself is decently well organized you can see that we have our main kpi so our north star kpis here and all these metrics make sense so employee count attrition count attrition rate active employees and average age i will say this dashboard is missing a really important dimension of time like what time period is this actually about but there's a lot of colors going on so number one we almost never use gradients at work the way that there is a gradient background i would remove that and um we also very seldomly use pie charts as well because pie charts lack the element of time they usually aren't that insightful you could um kind of you know looking at this pie chart you'll see that if this were to change over time we wouldn't know if that's better or worse than what it used to be because there's no comparison so just be mindful of not using pie charts in your dashboards so generally in terms of analytical rigor and professional polish i would rate this at a one out of five just because it's missing some of those key elements. In terms of business relevance, it is actually quite relevant because things like attrition rates, retention rates, and employee counts are relevant to every single company. So I would rate the business relevance a three out of five. Okay, this next portfolio is by Hamza, and this is what his website looks like. First off, it looks very clean and very professional, and I like that it lists the skills and then just goes right to the featured projects. Know that there's not a lot of jargon about the about me or featuring a resume or showing all your certifications. And you can see that his projects, there's just two of them. So it really narrows in my focus on these two projects as being the place that I should spend most of my time. Now the two projects is like investment performance monitor and Karachi weather forecast dashboard. Let me just dive in actually before I share my thoughts on the relevance of a weather forecast dashboard. So the investment performance monitor, you can see that there's two links, right? Explore project and view on GitHub. I would say that this is a little bit too much just by splitting it into a write-up in the personal website and then also having a write-up in github if i actually open these pages i can see that they could be consolidated so i recommend just having one main page that has all of your write-up and then the technical documentation somewhere else and just link directly to the github so you don't need to have a separate page where you talk about the project in the actual website just link directly to the github so that everyone has to click on this one main area where they can see your analysis and they can see the technical documentation up top okay so the project itself project overview key features architecture database schema future improvements tech stack screenshots and then apache airflow dags and installation and requirements now you guys might already know a little bit of what i'm going to say my main feedback here is just that this doesn't suit a data analyst job like at all um the dashboard itself just building a dashboard is of course related to an analyst job but if i was looking as a data analyst hiring manager and i saw this as being your project i would actually kind of rule you out of the pile because this shows that you are not aligned to analyst roles and that you're probably better suited to something that's a little bit more on the engineering and etl side then when i go to the other write-up on the actual website there's key achievements technologies use challenges solved and results. So there's basically 0% about insights, analysis, findings, recommendations, or visualizations. So in terms of business relevance, I would put this at a one out of five just because it doesn't have any business metrics or data sets used that actually show the kinds of analysis you would do at a company. Professional polish, I would say this is a three out of five just because the website itself looks really nice. It's just that the write-ups themselves don't look like something you would hand to a stakeholder. And in terms of analytical rigor, I would put this of 105 as well because there is technical rigor on the etl and pipeline side but there's not actually analysis there are no analytical frameworks or insights being delivered so my main feedback to you hamza is to just make sure that if you're applying to data in this roles look at the kinds of stakeholders business metrics and outputs and deliverables that those roles are actually looking for and make sure that your projects are focused on that kind of domain or consider if you're actually looking for something more of an engineering job then you should be making sure that you're applying to those kinds of roles with this portfolio instead next up is wendy's portfolio which is hosted on notion i like the simplicity of this portfolio because there's not a lot of fancy things going on and it's pretty easy to stand up a web page in notion so if you do want to host your projects and make you look a little bit nicer than what's in github then you can do something like what wendy did here where it's a gallery view in notion and then it's just published as a public page but again i don't really recommend you necessarily making a separate page you can just host things directly on github and make sure that you just have your most impactful two projects there so speaking of two projects right away one of the biggest um i would say faults of wendy's portfolio is just that there's too many projects so there's koala conservation use car prediction uh customer segmentation and again you can see that a lot of these are actually geared towards data science roles because they're tagged with things like python machine learning and statistics so it's kind of spreading her across a bunch of different domains um and a bunch of different roles as well so if you're applying to a data analyst role then this wouldn't really stand out the other thing is that on first glance i can already see that a lot of these are not that business relevance especially the first project so the first project that you put should be your most business relevant most impressive most analytically rigorous project but this is on conservation. And so unless you're only applying to roles that are centered around organizations or nonprofits that care about animal sustainability and longevity and conservation, then this project is not going to be that relevant to a high manager. Okay. So, um, let's dive into this project and just look at it as an example. So we have table of contents and everything is broken down here, the what, so there's overview, my role, objective data set, the how exploratory data analysis data visualization um analysis and then it has a bunch of different questions and drop downs here um and then finally the recommendation section at the bottom so overall this looks quite polished the main thing is obviously because it's on koala conservation it's just not going to be that relevant across domains but let's actually look at how when we frame this project so koalas are an iconic yet vulnerable species facing threats from habitat destruction climate change and disease so as a data analyst for koala conservation research my responsibility is to analyze a data set that tracks the physical and biological attributes of koalas and then we go into the analysis here and so in the exploratory data analysis now number one um if we were to reverse engineer the kinds of business metrics that you should be focusing on like koala attributes it's going to be not relevant at all right so something more relevant could have been something like um let's see maybe fundraising metrics for these kinds of conservation efforts if you can find data on that so the exploratory data analysis is kind of taking someone through the journey of what wendy did and then showing the output so for example this part will mainly focus on understanding data set handle missing and misspelled values for example i use matplotlib to create histograms for each numeric value now right away this is framed more so as hey this is is the technical stuff I did. I'm just going to show you that I can do this technical stuff. Again, this should be framed a lot more on what did you actually discover about the koalas if we're going to stick to that as the data set. So don't narrate the technical things that you're doing by saying, I'm going to use matplotlib. Think about whether or not you would actually say this to a stakeholder. They probably wouldn't be asking you, hey, what library in Python did you use? They would probably be asking you, what did you end up finding about the different attributes and why does that actually matter to me? When stakeholders ask us to do analysis, they usually aren't saying here's question one, here's question two, here's question three. It's usually along the lines of this is something I want to generally understand. And then it's on you as the analyst to break it down into bite-size understandable chunks. But we wouldn't really list a question and then list to answer. This is again, something that looks a little bit more like what you did in a school environment. So is the mean head length of the koala significantly different? For example, answer method, summary result and explanation. This shouldn't be as technical. It actually means in the context of the actual analysis and then the recommendation section at the bottom. Now I really like this table view. This is the first time I've seen a table view of this main insight and the recommendations that follow that. I think that's a really good idea and I like the way that it's formatted so that someone can really easily see, you know, this is the headline of the recommendation and this is the insight that it comes from. But right now these are very general. They're not really based on any metrics or any numbers that you saw above. So for example, focus on maintaining and enhancing key habitats in Victoria that support koala growth. That seems like a recommendation that didn't really need the analysis above, right? There's no numbers that actually follow directly from this insight. Something more insightful would be like, how much budget would you allocate to one area over another? Or generally, how many koalas do you think that you could save if you were able to focus on this one region in Victoria? Now, one thing I'll say is that your project should show the diversity of your skill rather than showing the same skills over and over again. Like this analysis that shows the Python visualizations and the Python code, again, it is showing me that you have the same skills over and over again. So I know that you know pandas, I know that you know NumPy, I know that you know Matplotlib, but we don't need like seven or eight projects to show us that, right? So this is a good example of a project that is mixing the technical level with the insights. So you can see that I'm showing, or Wendy is showing code and pie charts and the actual insight instead, but never show code as the main thing in that final write-up. This should instead not say pie charts are used to check distribution of categorical variables. It should say the insight about the categorical variable, show the pie chart that is most relevant, and then write out the insight so that the stakeholder is on the same page as you. And then the technical code should just be kept in the IPython notebook that is in a file that's linked in your repository so that someone can check the code if they want to, but they probably won't. They're probably just going to be skimming your analysis and saying, okay, what did you actually find about customer segmentation for this travel agency? So my main feedback to you, Wendy, is to just pick your two most company relevant projects, remove all the technical stuff from this first page cover keep that just in the github repository and then focus way more on deep diving into insights findings and recommendations and make sure to actually include business metrics and values in your insights and recommendations so that we can see the kinds of things that you would deliver to a stakeholder that follows from your analysis rather than keeping the recommendations very generic and high level that someone would be able to tell without actually doing that analysis in the first place so in terms of business relevance overall i would give this a 1.5 to 2 out of 5 because some of them are more company relevant professional polish the work itself actually looks quite polished but the technical stuff is just not something you would give to a stakeholder so i would say a two out of five there and then the analytical rigor the rigor of the analysis itself right now is just focused on creating these kinds of visualizations but there isn't a lot of analysis and deep diving into the insights and so i would give a 1.5 or 2 out of 5 out of there as well So overall, the current framing of those projects just don't make a hiring manager really confident in your ability to work as a data analyst. So make sure to reframe those projects, make sure that they're really aligned to analyst work and reformatted to look like something that you would give to a stakeholder. So now let's set that up and look at the kinds of projects that hiring managers and recruiters would open and think, okay, this person looks like they could do the job. All right. So first we have this website by Albert data-driven real estate insights beyond ROI. It's a bit of a interesting headline. I'm not really actually sure what that means. I think that this is better off, um, just simplifying some of the stuff that's on this page. So right now we have a headline, we have a bio, we have a logo, we have another language, my services, professional summary tools and technologies used another about, and then let's talk. And these three different links. Um, it's not really a big deal because again, someone's going to be more so just interested in your actual insights and what this looks like. But I think this can be simplified a little bit more. The main goal should be that someone wants to look at your projects. So Albert, maybe try, you know, moving your photo up here and then just having this be your main bio instead of having two separate sections and then linking your projects with like quick access links directly on the homepage and then putting my services and tools and technology used at the bottom because someone would probably get to this from your LinkedIn or your resume. So they would kind of already see it. We don't need to repeat it on the front page. So looking up here, I like that it's actually organized by domain knowledge, real estate, food tech, fintech. This actually makes Albert look like someone who has a little bit more experience than someone who's just starting out. And so if I go to the real estate page, I can see there's about four projects. Again, I think it's better here to just have two, at most three main projects that you just show on your homepage rather than having like four projects per domain. And then I think these two are still works in progress. So that's fine. Maybe if in the, in the situation, you know, these pages aren't ready, you can just consolidate this to picking your two best projects and putting that on the main homepage. Okay. So let's see predictive modeling skills and tools, use rage, LASO, regression, Jupiter, Python model deployment, and then cohort and retention, studying cohort analysis, data cleaning, retention curves, coastal impact regression models, and then plot generation and Python and Jupiter. So just on a quick skim, again, this is more geared towards data science roles. And so just make sure that the jobs that you're applying to, which actually seem more like data science positions in real estate or brokerage agencies or like that kind of industry in general, those roles will be aligned. But if you're just going for an analyst role at a finance company, for example, then it won't actually help you in this case to show these kinds of projects that are a different domain and using different kinds of technical tools. So let's go to Airbnb Evolution in Barcelona, because this is looking at cohort analysis, which is actually something that's relevant to data analysts. So in an era shaped by economic crisis and outraging increase in demand, COVID pandemic and increasing housing regulation, this project examines how Airbnb listings and host behaviors shifted in Barcelona. We focus on retention analysis, room type performance and cohort based LTV estimation. So very good. We already have some business metrics here, right? Retention, performance and LTV estimations. So this shows me that Albert has some experience in this domain let's go to learn more and see what the actual project looks like um okay so here's the full code on github data set overview and project goals what we dive into immediately now again same feedback here i think that everything should just be hosted directly as a readme on github so that people aren't splitting their attention and trying to read everything here and then also trying to go to your github um to see the code remember that your job is to make it as easy as possible for someone to see your skills as an analyst i think i keep repeating myself so i'm I'm going to stop hammering that home. Okay, so data set overview and project goal. For this analysis, three data sets were combined, and we have a consolidated data set of this many rows and columns. So this being the intro to your project, again, I don't really care how big the data set is. This should be framed around the stakeholder questions and insights. So something like this, the main goal of this project is to perform a host cohort analysis to understand retention, acquisition, and churn. Awesome. this stuff is not relevant i think you can give like a high level overview like a one sentence thing of what the data set contains where the data set is from and then just go right into the context as if you're talking to a uh let's see who who would this be this is an um airbnb host so let's say someone who works at airbnb who is focused on the hosting experience just go right into what you would actually present to them um key variable summary so we have a dictionary for what all the different categories and columns mean again this is not really relevant so i would remove all of this stuff this could go directly in the excel workbook where you have the actual data set and it could be labeled as data dictionary but no one is really going to poke into this or care about the specific columns they just want to see what you discovered so visuals and insights this is where i want to see deep dive insights that show what you discovered about the different host trend their retention and their acquisition so we have a bar graph and we're talking about the trends there another bar graph some more trends and then um another bar graph that is showing the distribution and a lot of bar graphs okay so the first thing that i want to see um and that makes a portfolio really stand out is if you can actually employ storytelling and diverse visualizations that build a narrative around what you discovered when i see bar graph bar graph bar graph because there are so many people who know how to generate bar graphs and just say what's happening in the bar graph this doesn't really help you stand out this looks a little bit more like what you should have left in the workbook rather than hey this is something interesting that i discovered and i want to share with you so um in terms of this let's say visuals and insights albert i would say try to think about what are the two to three main dimensions that you want to look at this analysis by and frame your entire analysis around those different dimensions. So let me see if I can quickly kind of garner what that would be. So for example, one dimension would be room type, another dimension might be time, so seasonality, and then maybe another dimension is like reviews. I don't know if you have like the reviews of the actual hosts. And so instead of just looking at it it very piecemeal by saying, here's a random bar graph and here's another random bar graph. And here's another random bar graph. The project should be framed around. We analyzed and understood trends in these three main dimensions. And based on these three main dimensions, this is what we observed about seasonality, about host reviews and about room type. And this is what we recommend to those hosts or whoever the right stakeholder is based on these findings. But what it is doing well is there is storytelling in the actual insights. So for example, following this peak, there was a fluctuating but generally high number of new listings receiving their first review. From this time, there's a sharp decline in listings with first reviews, which aligns with the onset of the COVID pandemic. And the extremely low number of listings suggests a continued or intensified impact of factors such as regulations or market saturation, further impacting the growth of new Airbnb properties in Barcelona. This is really good storytelling. Like what I love about this is we have timeframes so we can anchor ourselves in what, when this trend was actually happening. And then we have values from 59,000 in 2019 to 24 K in 2020. Generally, when it comes to high level insights, you can actually abbreviate this. So you can say 59 K in 2019 to 26, 25 K in 2020, just so that, you know, we can have the right level of detail at this high level summary. So, um, the storytelling and the narrative is coming through in the actual text, but it's not really coming through in the visualizations. So instead of saying something like distribution of listings by year of first review, which doesn't mean that much to me, I would like to see the main headline, right? So let's say year of first review peaked in 2014 and since then has been in a 20% decline, mostly driven by blank. And actually feature that headline and just do some formatting so that it doesn't look like it was something that was generated directly from a Python library. For example, things like removing the grid lines, abbreviating the numbers. So 78K, 106K, 81K. We don't really care about what the ones and the tens were when we're looking at this kind of analysis. Could you show something like a line graph on top of a bar graph to show how the average reviews change while the year of first review is a bar graph in the background to tell more of an interesting story? Okay, now let's go to cohorts. So what is the cohort? Median host lifetime value by registration cohort. And then this looks like it's broken. So just make sure to check that out. And then we're looking at cohort analysis. So cohort analysis is a, it's a little bit more of an advanced topic, I would say. It's something that maybe you would do at least a year or two years on the actual job. So this is a great sign that Albert's portfolio actually has cohort analysis because lots of companies do cohort analysis on their finance teams or their operations teams or their customer research teams. And it's basically this concept of taking one group of people and following them through a period of time and seeing how they evolve. So here's some insights. Earliest cohorts show the longest median host lifespans peaking at 14 years. And then there's a gradual decline and then there's an accelerated decline. So this is, again, very good storytelling here where we have this main headline here and it's kind of like the newsflash, the main thing that you need to know. And then after that, we have some specific insights that show the numbers. So this is the right level of detail to show in a portfolio project where you can imagine that I'm someone, let's say a customer success manager who works with hosts on Airbnb. And these are the insights that I would share directly with the hosts. So if we're looking at my scroll bar over here, you can see that about 50 or 40% of the first page was like technical stuff. And it was a lot of bar graphs. It would be much more effective if this was consolidated, like way consolidated, and you focused on the most interesting insights right away. The visualizations themselves can be made smaller so that someone doesn't have to scroll through so much to see the work that you did. So the insights should generally be about like, let's say 60% of your write-up. Recommendations can be like 40% of your write-up. So make sure that this is really elaborated on and that you make it clear why you made these recommendations by tying it back to the insights. So overall, in terms of business relevance, I would put this at a four out of five or five out of five, especially if you're geared towards real estate jobs, because cohort analysis and the data sets that you used are very company relevant. Professional polish, I would put this at a four out of five, because even though the website looks clean, there's just a lot going on. Like there's so much text, there's huge visualizations, so that can be refined a little bit more. And then in terms of analytical rigor, I would put this at a three out of five or four out of five, because that cohort analysis is actually quite in depth, but I would have liked to see a little bit more of the storytelling in the actual visualizations so that I can see the kind of work that you would give to a stakeholder on the job. So now let's look at another solid portfolio, which is by Molka, data enthusiast and aspiring data analyst with experience in Airbus as a PMO specializing in reporting and dashboard visualization. Now, one of the biggest tips for you guys is to remove the language of aspiring. Do not frame yourself as someone who is an aspiring or a wannabe data analyst. Frame yourself as a data analyst. If you have the analyst skills, you are a data analyst who has a specialization in any of these kinds of things, right? So say your domain knowledge, say specifically what you like to do. For example, in Mocha's case, she said reporting and dashboard visualization. I like to have a little bit more personality if I'm ever including a bio in my GitHub or my resume. So you could say something like with a penchant for creative visualization, right? Or with an ability to empathize with stakeholders, something that's a little bit more unique than just reporting and dashboard visualization. Okay, so let's look at the way that Mocha presented her projects. I like that this is all in GitHub already, and you can see that it's very straightforward. So we have this main cover page that gives an overview of these projects. So CitySpot is a project, ElectroStore is a project, Netflix, a list, and then it shows skills, tools and technologies, education and certifications at the bottom. So I really like this way that this looks. It's very practical and it's very easy to stay organized and see what the overall goals were of each project. So nice job there. Now in terms of tools and skills used, I think that this could just be summarized. You don't need to say like exactly what you're doing in every single tool, Python, Excel, Power Query, Power BI again, because mostly someone's going to be focusing on your actual insights. So let's look at this first project, which is CitySpot. It's a data analysis project developed as part of my portfolio as a junior data analyst. Again, don't frame it as, hey, I built this project just for my portfolio. Frame it as the goal of CitySpot is to help individuals. This is what I was doing at CitySpot. And here's my analysis. So take out that first sentence, the project goal, the data set, the description of the actual columns. There's just a lot of stuff going on here. This does not need to be in here, as I said before. So remove that, put that in Excel, and then get right down to data exploration, data cleaning, and the summary. So in terms of data exploration and data cleaning steps, you will almost never really be presenting steps to a stakeholder. So all of this stuff should also be put in the background in the actual files themselves. You can, you know, have maybe two sentences explaining what you did in the exploration and the cleaning, just like summarizing it. But if I elaborate on all of these different toggles, like this is just way too much technical stuff here. So exploratory data analysis. Now we're looking at univariate analysis, bivariate analysis, and multivariate analysis. Now notice how this is all framed around the technical thing that was done instead of what you actually found. So I would have loved if this was headlines, right? So what did you actually discover? What is the cost of living index? And what did you find about the segments or the freedom score, for example? Like that headline should be this newsflash. It should not be, I did a univariate analysis. And then for each of these different sections, there's a lot of stuff going on where the visualization there and then the insight is there as well. But there's just so much in terms of the quantity of what to get through that someone could very easily get like overwhelmed by how much information is in here. So focus a little bit more on what are the main insights that you discover, the dimensions that you would slice by, and what are those insights. Tie this all together. What does this mean? why would someone care right so that would be maybe something more like cost of living is highly related to quality of life um organizations focus on increasing quality of life should focus on three these three main aspects right it should not just be stating like one thing that you're seeing in the visualization as a bullet and then we have a dashboard here um the dashboard looks fine i think it looks quite simple and straightforward i like that the main filters are up here as we usually do at work. I just think that there's not a lot of insights going on here, right? The map, usually we don't use maps at work just because they're not something that change over time. We can't see a trend or like business metrics that actually move with the map. So maybe consider instead showing something like some graphs that show how these things have changed over time and then carry all of that through to your other projects as well. So maybe just pick two or three projects that you want to revamp and keep on the last page on this main page to show to a hire manager so in terms of mocl's portfolio i would say business relevance is like a 2.5 to 3 out of 5 just because it is framed around companies that you know are pretty representative the kinds of companies that we work with it's just that it doesn't really look into business metrics that a company would really use so i would say three out of five there professional polish i would say a four out of five um this front page looks very clean and the readme's are also very clean as well they just need to be consolidated to get to the so what faster and then in terms of analytical rigor, I would say four out of five as well, because the analysis and the exploration, it shows that you clearly know how to do data exploration and data cleaning, but I want to see a little bit more depth and detail in your insights and your recommendations. Okay. So now let's go to Divya's portfolio. And this is one of the best personal websites I've seen. Um, as far as it comes to portfolio projects, I love how sleek it is and, um, how straightforward it is without actually making someone click through a bajillion different links to get to different sections. You can just see the About Me, the project, certifications, resume, core skills, and education. So kudos to you Divya because this looks really, really good. Then if we go to the projects. So project case studies, I already like that there's only four projects in here and you can go directly and see that the names of the projects are very analyst relevant. Churn prediction model, sustainable BI solution computer vision robot and d connect platform are a little bit less relevant but these first two sound very relevant it's just that you would want to name this something that's a little bit more unique so many people can say they did a turn prediction model so um you know is it an e-commerce trend prediction model or is there a sample company name that you can come up with and add that to the title as well so let's go to see on github and i also like that this goes directly to github instead of having a separate page that you also have to click on and we can service churn prediction. So you could actually title this SaaS churn prediction model, and then that would be very relevant to SaaS companies. Okay. So now we have a table of contents, objective, data source, sampling process, tools, and techniques, methodology, forward selection. So testing stuff, stepwise selection, backward elimination, and final model selection, and then insights and conclusion. So again, Divya, you're actually mixing two different kinds of roles here because you're showing all the results from like modeling. And then you're showing the insights from the analysis itself. So make sure to be really clear with yourself about what kind of skills and roles you're applying to. If it's analyst positions, then you should not actually include any of this stuff about model selection approach, stepwise selection, or backward elimination, because this means basically gibberish to an analyst stakeholder. And so for this project, let's see what this project is about. Uses logistic regression modeling to analyze and predict customer churn for a sub-based digital service. It identifies behavioral and demographic features that influence whether a customer is likely to cancel their subscription and supports orgs in developing targeted retention strategies. Now, this is super company relevant. Almost all companies would want to better understand why someone churns and how you can better target them to stay more on the platform. So great job there. Company relevance in general is like a four or five out of five already. Now, all of this stuff, so data set sampling process, all the way down to here basically all the way down to insights which is like basically the very bottom all that stuff should be somewhere else um you could include it in a technical documentation page which is just like a pdf for your own reference that you include in the readme but then i'm more so interested in this insight section now this insight section is just a bunch of small paragraphs that doesn't really help me see the headlines so use bolding use headers use visualizations to show what that story is. So let's read this story. Early stage customers tend to be fragile. Customers with shorter account ages were more likely to turn and it became clear that if we do not win them early, we'll probably lose them quickly. Investing in onboarding and engaging a customer in their early involvement could alter the curve. This is such a good insight, but it's buried at the bottom. And there's also no visualization or storytelling to help me understand where this is coming from, right? So there should be graphs here and it should say what that headline is. So for example, there would be a graph it might say early stage customers tend to be fragile and then at the bottom there would be a caption that actually includes some metrics and numbers so when you say shorter account ages account ages that were shorter by how much and more likely to churn what was the churn rate of this group compared to the mid-stage customers for example um and then let's go to the conclusion so it shows that churn is not an attribute influenced by one factor it's influenced by customer behaviors, focus on retention with the first month through onboarding and individualized nudges. So this is actually more of a recommendation section. So reframe this as recommendations and make it clear that your recommendations come from the insights above by referencing them. So for example, when you're saying focus on retention within the first month, write parentheses based on seeing early adopters turn with X percent more than adopters that have activity in their first month, something like that. I kind of butchered the wording there, but you know what I mean. So yeah, that's my main insight here. Let's go back to the other projects. Sustainable BI solution. So this already is way more fleshed out than the first project. So great job there. I can see that there's a lot more of the actual insights. There's some headlines here and there's some recommendations. The thing is this part is a little bit disorganized because it has things like huge visualization and then paragraph, another visualization, and then like paragraph, paragraph, paragraph, insight number two. So we need to just organize this a little bit so that it's a bit more digestible. You don't need to show the graph over and over again, just have the insights and people will be able to understand that it comes from that dashboard. So Divya for you in terms of business relevance, I would say four out of five or five out of five, just because the metrics in general are very business relevant. It just needs a little bit of consolidation and refinement to give it to make it stakeholder ready and same with professional polish so that's around like a four out of five if you're able to just make this shorter and focus a lot more on the insights than the technical stuff then that will really step it up and then analytical rigor so actually building this dashboard and looking at the insights and also bringing in a little bit of your domain knowledge um i'd say that you've done a pretty good job there this seems like a pretty deep dive analysis so i'd give you a four out of five there as well so these projects show genuine potential as a data data analyst and with a little bit more refinement and storytelling, they can really boost a hiring manager's confidence in you as a data analyst. Finally, saving the best for last, let's now dive into two standout projects that are strategic and rich with insights and actionable findings. These are exactly the kinds of projects that if I saw as a hiring manager, I would think immediately that this person is worth an interview. So this project is actually by one of my students who just landed a data specialist job at IBM. And we're going to look at what he did in his portfolio project. So e-commerce performance report, he actually created a logo for it and then carried these company colors all throughout the project. We're going to see in a little bit. We have client backgrounds. So TechSphere is a US-based e-commerce company that sells popular consumer electronics and accessories to a global clientele. It's established in 2018, the company has grown and expanded. The book of business is approaching 88,000 customers and possesses over 108K transactions, generating sales revenue exceeding $28 million. Reporting to the head of operations, an in-depth analysis was conducted to evaluate the performance over the past several years. The key insights and recommendations focus on the following areas. Boom, right into the Northstar metrics. And all of this is framed as if you were an analyst actually working at this company. So Northstar metrics, we have sales trends, product performance, loyalty program evaluation, and regional results. So we're looking at key metrics of revenue, borders, place, and AOV, different product lines, market impact, and refund rates. Loyalty program and evaluation is looking at the effectiveness of the loyalty program and recommendations to maximize customer engagement and evaluating regional demand and product performance. Now, all of these aspects are things that would be relevant to basically any SaaS company, any tech company, any company selling a physical product or an e-commerce company. And you can see how a hiring manager looking at this would immediately see this person has a lot of domain knowledge in some of the same metrics that we look at. Executive summary. And so we see revenue growth and peak performance, declining trend in 2022, quarterly insights and seasonal trends, and key takeaways and recommendations. So this exec summary is excellent. It's basically a 45 second or a one minute overview of the entire analysis that you could hand directly to a VP and say, Hey, this is what I found. And this is what I think is most important for you to pay attention to. The visualization itself is very sleek. You can see that he was really intentional about removing things like grid lines, even getting rid of a y-axis, which is a bit of a creative decision because he just wanted to show the overall trend and the high level numbers, right? And so sales revenue analysis, I think this actually could have been adjusted to an actual headline. So something like sales revenue peaked in January of 2020, mostly driven by blank. And since then it's decreased to normalized levels at the, after the pandemic or something like that. Okay. So now moving on to the rest of the analysis, data structure and ERD, this helps us get a sense of the kind of data that you're working with. And I can already see at a high level, the data set is relevant to all the kinds of data that we see at the companies that I mentioned before. And we don't really dive into what the definitions are. We leave that for the actual Excel workbook. So this is a really nice ERD that also suits the colors of the overall analysis. Insights deep dive. So now you can see the insights deep dive organized by a few main dimensions. So we see sales trend and then we see product performance, and then we see loyalty program, learnings, refund rates, and regional results already. This is already really organized and it helps me see, okay, these are the main four or five dimensions that you considered that I should pay attention to. The visualizations themselves are also really diverse. So I have a line graph with these kinds of average values here that is really sleek. There's no grid lines. There's no unnecessary axes or unnecessary numbers, even things like rounding to $1.3 million tells me that you know how to speak to executives. And then we have a bar graph here that shows sales growth versus AOV growth. So I can see the actual absolute dollars. And then I can also see the month over month or month over year change in a percentage. Then we have a line graph as a series that shows how these sales trends actually differed by product. And then at the bottom, I have a bar graph, a heat map, and then a line graph showing AUV by loyalty status and number of orders by loyalty status. So already Jonathan's portfolio stands out from most of the portfolios that I've seen submitted because of how diverse his visualizations are and how clean and polished they look. Now let's look at some of his actual insights. So sales revenue, there's a sharp decline in Q4 2022, a major sales anomaly, post pandemic sales normalization during 2020 to 2022, and declining growth throughout 2022. And you can see that he's reporting the actual observations from his visualization above while having a headline that makes it really clear what the main so what is. Average order value, order count, and then looking at product performance. So already, just from the insights and like how long each of these bullets are, I can see that his sales trends analysis is very in-depth. And a lot of this is just storytelling. It's actually observing what the visualization is saying and then bringing an actual narrative to it by putting it down on paper in an understandable way. For example, Q4, historical low indicating critical demand issues. So this suggests customer retention, pricing, or product market fit issues. TechSphere may need to re-strategize through marketing promotions or change in pricing. Now, this actually shows a lot of analytical rigor as an analyst who's integrated on a team because he's mentioning stakeholder names. These are not insights that he's just gathering because he wants to do it for fun. They're insights and findings that would be helpful to someone else. And he makes that very clear by mentioning these teams throughout the analysis. Um, okay. So product performance, the best and worst AOV over time and heat map findings, the way this is organized is also just very structured by having this three column view. Um, instead of having a block of texts and paragraph after paragraph, after paragraph, I can see immediately. Okay. If I wanted to see the top and the worst performing products, this is what it looks like. If I wanted to see how the expensive or non-expensiveness of the products changed over time, then it's over here. Um, okay. So then I'm just going to scroll all the way down to the bottom. And I also just want to point out this graph right here, regional results. So it's a graph that shows how for every single region, their sales revenue changed from 2019, the green dot, to 2022, the yellow dot. Now this is a bit of a unique visualization. I've never really seen a graph like this before. I actually don't even know what it's really called, but even though it's not that commonly used, because it's so clean and polished, and because Jonathan actually use this visualization to surface some of the insights below it gives him some bonus points it shows his creativity as an analyst and his ability to think outside the box and notice that any of these visualizations i could have screenshotted and put directly on a slide with a bunch of bullets and handed it directly to a non-technical stakeholder then the recommendations at the bottom so we have sales products loyalty program refund rates and regions notice how they're all broken up by dimension. So I can say that this would go for the sales team. This would go to the product team. This would go to the marketing or the loyalty program team. An example is remedy sales lows due to seasonal fluctuations in January and February by increasing marketing campaigns during these low sales periods. The average sales growth year over year is for January is negative 12%. And for February it's negative 23%. And so he's actually showing that his recommendations come directly from the insights that he discovered above by showing the values for the main findings. So overall, this project stands out because the executive summary is so clear and concise and shows that you can speak at a high level to a number of different kinds of stakeholders. The visualizations are creative, they're sleek, they are slide ready, and they have a lot of professional polish because they use the same colors as the company. And then the analytical rigor also stands out because the insights themselves are geared directly to a stakeholder and they also list the actual business metrics and have values throughout that tie it back to the findings. So overall on all three dimensions, on analytical rigor, professional polish, and business relevance, I would say five out of five for this entire project. And it's also no wonder that Jonathan was able to get a job as a data specialist just a few weeks after this project. And then this standout project is from Reshma. Now, Reshma is someone who is a little bit more experienced. So I also wanted to show this project for people who are going for roles that use a bit more domain knowledge and also as a North Star for those of you guys who are just starting out on your data journey to see what you could eventually get to after you've been working in the industry. So data analyst with three plus years of experience and a master's in business analytics from UMass Amherst, featured projects, and then skills and tools and certifications. Now notice that Reshma actually has more experience than many of the projects that we looked at, but her portfolio page is much shorter, right? So that kind of just shows you that the more experience that you have, the more you can let your projects do the talking for you instead of need to create a really fancy website. Because again, this is just a published page on Notion. So I like that skills and tools and certifications are at the bottom. And then it just has a quick note on how to get in contact with Reshma. So very clean. And the certifications themselves, I just want to mention this. These certifications are for certifications that are not very generic, right? It's not the Google data analytics certification or the IBM certification. It's actually about a specific tool that is a bit more advanced. So that's why it's great that it's actually on this page. Now let's look at the projects. So highlights of key projects where I analyzed large health insurance data sets, developed data visualizations to track business performance, and created stakeholder presentations to deliver actionable business insights. So this already positions Reshma really well for any kind of healthcare roles, and this would stand out for those kinds of positions, might not be as relevant to other roles. So let's actually dive in. Medicare Part D cost concentration analysis. Again, very company relevant role. I can see that it's about cost concentration and it's about this specific kind of industry. Let's look at this analysis. We have a long table of contents, project background, insights and recommendations, and then data structure and initial checks. I'm just doing a first skim. Exec summary, the trends, and then insights deep dive, which is great. And then scrolling all the way to the bottom, we have some main KPIs and recommendations. So already this follows the flow that I recommend, which is this high level summary and project background, and then going into deep dive insights and recommendations, right? So it follows the general analytical lifecycle of what we do on the job. And again, Medicare Part D provides prescription drug coverage to promote transparency and support research. We'll look at this data set submitted by providers enrolled in Medicare Part D, 1 million prescription records. So this is already a very large, rigorous data set that is really relevant to any kind of healthcare organization. Insights and recommendations are provided on the following key areas. So cost concentration analysis, price differential analysis, provider targeting strategy, performance tracking framework. I don't actually know what this specific terminology means, but just the fact that Reshma picked these four main areas and very clearly stated it, and then already has some quantified metrics just from the get-go. This positions her as a analyst with experience and expertise in this field. So that's very, very good. SQL queries used to inspect and clean the data, targeted SQL query. So she's just kind of separating out the technical stuff. Notice that none of this is about data cleaning. None of it is about what we did in SQL or Python. It's just saying, hey, if you want to look at the technical stuff, it's here, but let's just get right into the actual analysis. Small note, I think this can just be a little bit smaller. It's just quite large. So we can just make that a bit smaller and then get right into the exec summary. So overview of findings medic part d is dangerously concentrated with just 10 drugs consuming over 30 of all costs most critically this presents a quantifiable 543 million dollars in annual savings opportunity through targeted step therapy so um one thing that i would say is it would be nice to be broken to have this broken up by a visualization so if we can just have a graph here that shows the distribution of 10 drugs consuming over 30 of all costs i think that comes a little bit lower so So it's here. But I think that that should be in the exact summary to support that first statement. Okay, so in the insights deep dive, I like how this is organized where we have these main headlines, blood thinners are dominating the market, the diabetes drug revolution and patent cliff opportunities. So these as the main kind of headline, okay, this is what we're talking about here. And then the insight below. Now the visualizations themselves, I think could just be a little bit more rigorous and more analytical. So having bar graphs, again, it's very, very simple. we show the distribution of drugs over time or can we show the distribution of drugs split by another dimension because um this visualization doesn't really do that much storytelling it's just kind of telling us okay this top 10 drugs drive the 30 but um it would be more insightful to be able to see this over time or to diversify some of the visualizations instead of showing bar graph over bar graph over bar graph okay um now let's go down to the uh savings calculation discovery so um this is also broken out by a number of structured categories right conservative methodology validation sensitivity analysis robustness specific drug target quantification so this shows reshma's domain knowledge and like the way that you would actually calculate these savings i'm going to go down to the bottom because i think this is a little bit more relevant to everyone else but i think it's a really good example of the organization where we have this main headline uh then we have a main bullet that separates out the main story and then we have this kind of like supplemental information okay so at the bottom the recommendations target high volume and moderate cost drugs focus on patent expired biologics target prescriber driven cost patterns and address the 30 cost concentration i love that the recommendations are just so clear to see again with the actual structure of how Reshma formatted her final write-up. And then she has a note on how to actually calculate the KPIs and assumptions and caveats. So overall, in terms of business relevance for the healthcare industry, this is obviously a 5 out of 5. And in terms of professional polish, I would basically say this is a 4.5 out of 5. The last kind of final thing is to make the visualizations a little bit more diverse and interesting and creative. And then lastly, in terms of analytical rigor, this is also a 5 out of 5. just because of the depth of knowledge that it shows in calculating those savings and explaining her thought process along the way so awesome job reshma the other thing that reshma does that i thought was interesting was actually have a loom presenting the insights now i love this and reshma i think you have a really good handle on communication and presenting in general so i would actually put this directly into that first project um since it seems like they're related if not the same project so that someone can get to it immediately and then you just have these two main projects that are really, you know, that have a bit of a wow factor to them. And so put the loom like somewhere at the top where it just says, um, walkthrough of presentation with analysis below. And then having this loom is an amazing way for a hiring manager or a recruiter to see how you would explain your insights on the actual job. So I love that idea. And I think more of you guys could also adopt the same idea in your own portfolios. So remember that ultimately a standout portfolio projects looks like something that you could hand directly to a non-technical stakeholder right now as is. And if you want some more insight on how to do this, then check out my portfolio playbook here and sign up for my newsletter below for more insights and examples of how my students have used their portfolios to stand out in the job hunt. That's it for this video. I hope it was helpful, even if it was a long one. And thank you guys again for everyone who submitted your projects and I will see you guys in the next video.